Skip to content
Rutgers

Eagleton Institute of Politics
Navigate this page

Florence Peshine Eagleton
Wood Lawn Mansion and Carriage House
Resources

What We Do
Faculty & Staff
News & Media
Eagleton Calendar
Contact Us
Eagleton History

Suffragist Florence Peshine Eagleton, a founder of New Jersey’s League of Women Voters, left the bequest that established the Institute in 1956. Today, Eagleton faculty and staff work closely with political practitioners and scholars in New Jersey and across the nation to accomplish Florence Eagleton’s ambitious goal: “the development of and education for responsible leadership in civic and governmental affairs and the solution of their political problems.”

Florence Peshine Eagleton
Florence Peshine Eagleton

Florence Peshine Eagleton, a Newark native and a product of a local “finishing school,” was born in 1870 and grew up as the battle for woman suffrage was coming to a head. She led the state’s Women’s Political Union and became vice president of the New Jersey Woman Suffrage Association, leading a petition drive in Newark that helped convince the state legislature to ratify the 19th amendment. Once the amendment was ratified, Eagleton became the first president of the Newark League of Women Voters. She led the League in developing a series of “citizenship schools” to educate women for their new responsibilities as voters.

“It is my settled conviction that the cultivation of civic responsibility and leadership among the American people in the field of practical political affairs is of vital and increasing importance to our state and nation …. I make this gift especially for the development of and education for responsible leadership in civic and governmental affairs and the solution of their political problems.”
– Florence Peshine Eagleton

Beyond her suffrage work, Eagleton was active in many other organizations: the New Jersey Birth Control League; the Newark Maternal Health Center; the Visiting Nurses Association; the New Jersey League of Nations Association; and the Daughters of the American Revolution. She was among the organizers of the New Jersey College for Women, which later became Douglass College. She served as a trustee of Rutgers University from 1932 to 1946 – one of the first women in that role — and then assumed the status of “trustee emerita.”

The varied threads of Florence Eagleton’s life are woven together in the establishment of the Eagleton Institute of Politics. According to the story handed down over the years, she and her second husband, neurosurgeon Wells Phillips Eagleton, had an agreement: after one died, the survivor could designate the ultimate recipients of their fortune. He wanted the money to foster medical research, but when he died first, her preferred cause won out, expressed in her will as “the advancement of learning in the field of practical political affairs and government [so] that a knowledge of the meaning of democracy may be increased through the education of young women and men in democratic government.” Legend also says that the original draft referred only to “young women,” but “and men” was added at the insistence of her attorneys. The will goes on to say, “It is my settled conviction that the cultivation of civic responsibility and leadership among the American people in the field of practical political affairs is of vital and increasing importance to our state and nation … I make this gift especially for the development of and education for responsible leadership in civic and governmental affairs and the solution of their political problems.”

Sources: New York Times obituary, “Mrs. Wells Eagleton, Rutgers Trustee, 83.” Published 11/24/53; Hidden New Jersey website: www.hiddennj.com/2013/11/the-right-to-vote-and-beyond-legacy-of.html; and stories passed down at the Eagleton Institute of Politics.

 

Wood Lawn Mansion and Carriage House

Staircase in Wood Lawn 

A unit of Rutgers University-New Brunswick, the Eagleton Institute of Politics is located in Wood Lawn, a nineteenth-century mansion listed on the National Register of Historic Places.

Wood Lawn was built in 1830 by Colonel James Neilson (1784 – 1862), an early Rutgers trustee. As part of the Scarlet and Black Project, Rutgers University recently announced the dedication of a new marker to be installed at Wood Lawn Mansion to honor the memory of the people whose lives and work at Wood Lawn have been overlooked for too long because they were enslaved by the Neilson family. Additional information regarding the installation is forthcoming.



“These markers are an invitation for us to talk about the complicated legacies of namesakes and the complicated ways in which blood money from slavery is woven into old institutions like Rutgers.”
– Rutgers President Jonathan Holloway

The Neilson Family:

(A revision of this section is forthcoming)

The family’s heritage was rooted in New Brunswick by the first James Neilson, who emigrated to New Jersey from the north of Ireland. Active in the shipping and mercantile industries, he was one of the first trustees of the College of New Jersey (now Princeton University). He was also one of the petitioners for the charter granted to New Brunswick in 1730. His nephew, John Neilson (1745 – 1833) established business interests in shipping by adding turnpikes and canals for the transport of freight and passengers to the family businesses. John Neilson was a trustee of Rutgers and was named Colonel of the Middlesex County minutemen.

Colonel James Neilson, the son of John Neilson, built Wood Lawn on a portion of the land originally purchased by his mother’s grandfather, Johannis Voorhees, in 1720. A member of the Rutgers Board of Trustees who had also served as a commander of a company in the war of 1812, Colonel James Neilson was a prominent New Brunswick businessman.

The Colonel was widowed three times; James Neilson, his only son by his fourth wife, was the last Neilson to occupy Wood Lawn. James Neilson and his wife, Mary Putnam Woodbury, were collectors of rare Americana. They shared Wood Lawn with Neilson’s mother for several years before building the cottage next door, where they lived until 1905, when they returned to the large house, which had been vacant since Neilson’s mother died in 1893.

James Neilson was also a trustee of Rutgers and donated large tracts of land to the University, expanding the campuses of what became Douglass and Cook Colleges.

 

The House:

The original house is described by Moxon et. al. as nearly square (40 by 44 feet), with a hipped roof supported by tall columns which created a portico. The house had two stories and a basement with space for a kitchen, dairy cellar, root cellar and wine cellar. The first floor contained an entry, four rooms and a pantry, while the second floor contained rooms divided by partitions and closets. Each room was to have “a handsome well-finished mantlepiece.” A circular staircase descended from the second floor hallway to the basement.

In 1850 a kitchen wing was added to the house, and the circular stair was removed to provide space for a rear entrance hall. In 1868 eight bay window extensions were added, one in each of the four large rooms on both the first and second floors. At the same time, a porch was created in place of the portico and the hipped roof was replaced by a mansard roof. Extensive alterations were made in 1905 by the firm of McKim, Mead and White. In order to extend the center hall, the Neilsons had the right half of the house moved and added the present staircase and the large Palladian window overlooking it, as well as additional classical elements.

The current appearance of the house combines several distinct architectural styles including Neo-Classical, Second Empire, and Colonial Revival. This unique appearance has gained Wood Lawn a listing on the National Register of Historic Places.

Florence Peshine Eagleton

Wood Lawn After the Neilson Family:

Upon James Neilson’s death, Wood Lawn was left to Rutgers University. It was occupied for many years by the Associate Alumnae of Douglass College. During that period, distinguished visitors to Wood Lawn included Eleanor Roosevelt, who met with students at the College; a photo displayed in Wood Lawn’s dining room shows her in that room.

For more than 60 years, Wood Lawn and its Carriage House have been home to the Eagleton Institute of Politics.

Eagleton Institute of Politics
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey

191 Ryders Lane
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-8557
Tel: (848) 932-9384
Fax: (732) 932-6778
   
Eagleton Calendar
Contact Us
Work at Eagleton
Annual Reports
Privacy/Legal
Search Rutgers
Sign up for email list
SIGN UP NOW
Copyright ©2024, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, an equal opportunity, affirmative action institution. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy.
Rutgers is an equal access/equal opportunity institution. Individuals with disabilities are encouraged to direct suggestions, comments, or complaints concerning any accessibility issues with Rutgers websites to accessibility@rutgers.edu or complete the Report Accessibility Barrier / Provide Feedback form.


What We Do



The Eagleton Institute of Politics at Rutgers University–New Brunswick studies how American politics and government work and change, offers critical analysis on strengthening democratic processes, and champions active citizenship through robust civic engagement initiatives. The state of American democracy is central to the work the Institute undertakes. One of the institute’s core values is “engaging in critical examination of systems of power and governance, including the ideals for, and practice of, democracy.”

It is therefore important for the Institute to outline the American democratic principles that it is dedicated to teaching, supporting, defending, and improving. The Institute believes that the following principles are among the key factors that define a thriving liberal democracy, and which we strive to center in our work

 

Constitutional Framework and Fundamental Rights

A shared understanding of and commitment to the United States Constitution and the governmental structure that emanates from it.

Respect for the U.S. Constitution and the values therein, including the rule of law, separation of powers, an independent judiciary, and the institutions designed to defend and execute constitutional principles.
Defense of constitutionally guaranteed freedoms essential for civic participation including freedoms of assembly, religious belief and practice, expression, and speech.
Protection of minority populations and opinions while respecting majority rule. The U.S. Constitution and the American liberal democratic system provide protections for minority populations and opinions that must be defended, including these fundamental rights and principles of equality.
Information Integrity and Civil Discourse

A commitment to disseminating accurate information and fostering the productive exchange of ideas that a system of self-government requires.

A free and independent press that has the ability and opportunity to question power structures and report on political and government issues.
Public access to factual and accurate information that improves civic preparedness and allows observers and participants to come to well-informed decisions.
A robust and respectful civic conversation that welcomes curiosity, questioning, and diverse viewpoints while maintaining civility.
Good governance through transparent decision-making processes and rigorous accountability mechanisms that ensure public officials serve the public interest, enable citizens to observe government actions, and create pathways for meaningful public participation.
Inclusive Democratic Participation

Ensuring that institutions and practices of democracy are accessible and respected.

Fair, free, and secure elections accessible to all eligible voters followed by a peaceful and orderly transfer of power.
Freedom from discrimination against any group that hampers or inhibits its ability to participate fully in the civic square.
Public defense and promotion of civic participation, including defending freedom of speech and assembly and safeguarding “civic space” in which these activities can take place.
Sources: To Keep the Republic (Matto); https://www.chathamhouse.org/2021/04/importance-democracy, https://www.vanderbilt.edu/principles/, https://www.un.org/en/global-issues/democracy, https://www.mccaininstitute.org/resources/in-the-news/a-civil-society-declaration-of-democratic-principles-on-the-occasion-of-the-2023-summit-for-democracy/

The Place for Politics at Rutgers

Florence Peshine Eagleton, a suffragist and social change activist of her time, left the bequest that established the Institute at Rutgers in 1956. Today, Eagleton faculty and staff work closely with political practitioners and scholars in New Jersey and across the nation to accomplish Florence Eagleton’s ambitious goal: “the development of and education for responsible leadership in civic and governmental affairs and the solution of their political problems.”

Core Values

The Eagleton Institute of Politics is committed as an institution to the following:

Cultivating access and empowerment within the Institute and, by extension, our political system. We seek to identify and remove barriers to access and promote inclusion, which relies on our active and intentional efforts to remedy power inequities.
Affirming the humanity of all people irrespective of their historic marginalization, identity, or socioeconomic status, through our teaching, research, and programming. We center historically marginalized voices and oppose policies and practices that discriminate against anyone on the basis of these historic and present realities.
Engaging in critical examination of systems of power and governance, including the ideals for, and practice of, democracy.
Promoting open and respectful exchange of ideas and perspectives that abides by the values listed above and preserves the safety and well-being of all participants.
Fostering interest in, and promoting, a broad range of engagement in politics, communities, and public service, by all members of society, especially our students.
Studying American Politics and Political Change

The Institute welcomes entrepreneurial thinkers who develop new knowledge about emerging topics and themes in American politics. Eagleton’s faculty, centers, and programs study:

Campaigns, elections and political parties
Civic education and political engagement
Ethics
Governors and state politics
Minority and immigrant political behavior
New Jersey politics
Public opinion polling and survey research
Public safety and community resilience
Science and politics
Women’s political participation
Youth political participation and young elected leaders
To learn more, explore the Institute’s centers and major program areas and searchable research archive or attend an event. Learn more about Eagleton’s criteria for non-tenure track research professor series.

Preparing Students for Civic Engagement

Eagleton’s curricular education programs prepare selected undergraduate and graduate students to engage in politics as responsive, effective, ethical citizens and leaders. Undergraduate Associates and Eagleton Graduate Fellows learn from experienced faculty and political practitioners as well as through placements in political or government offices, discovering the real world of American politics beyond the headlines.

Students get involved at Eagleton through individual courses, research assistantships and internships, programs, and events featuring national political experts.

Educators can get involved at Eagleton and access Institute resources. Eagleton offers a range of research and programs that can support those who are working to educate responsive, effective, ethical citizens and leaders.

Civil Discourse Expectations

Classes, programs and other events convened by the Eagleton Institute of Politics are premised on the belief that, in order for our democracy to work, we need to be able to talk to each other. Students and other program participants are expected to engage in open and civil discourse, recognizing that meaningful exchange of ideas from different perspectives requires reasoned deliberation based on shared facts and conducted with respect and curiosity, and with affirmation of the humanity of all people irrespective of their historic marginalization, identity or socioeconomic status. In addition, like all Rutgers students, students at Eagleton are expected to comply with the Rutgers University Code of Conduct.

Free Expression at Rutgers University

Rutgers is committed to the freedom of speech. The free expression and discussion of ideas is essential to our university’s core mission and values. We encourage open and civil discussion, debate, and exploration of ideas and viewpoints while we preserve the right of all in our community to learn, teach, and carry out the university’s essential work. Please review the Free Expression at Rutgers website for more information about our community’s policies and standards.

